NEWS ANIMALS
This spider uses trapped fireflies to lure in
more prey
Male fireflies ensnared in the spider's web flash their lanterns like females, luring more
males
An orb weaver spider (Araneus ventricosus) wraps a male firefly (Abscondita terminalis) that got stuck in its web. The spider’s
venom or its bite may cause the firefly’s flashing lights to blink in a femalelike pattern, luring other males into the web.
XINHUA FU
By Erin Garcia de Jesús
3 HOURS AGO
Sometimes fireflies shouldn’t follow the light.  
Subscribe today
Every print subscription comes with full digital accessSUBSCRIBE NOW
SIGN IN
S P LA S H IN G . S LID IN G .
S A V IN G S .
8/19/24, 2:43 PM This spider uses trapped ﬁreﬂies to lure in more prey
https://www.sciencenews.org/article/spider-ﬁreﬂies-lure-venom-web 1/4A single flash from a female usually helps male Abscondita terminalis fireflies
find her among tall grasses at dusk. Males are showier, giving off multiple
light pulses to attract a mate. If ensnared in an orb weaver spider’s web,
however, flashy males can become deadly decoys.  
Orb weaver spiders seem to trick male fireflies into blinking in a pattern
more like females, researchers report August 19 in Current Biology. The
femalelike lights lure other males into the web, allowing the arachnids to
stock up on food.  
“What a cool behavior,” says Ximena Nelson, an animal behaviorist at the
University of Canterbury in Christchurch, New Zealand, who was not
involved with the study. The new observations add a unique hunting tactic to
spiders’ repertoires (SN: 9/18/23).    
Behavioral ecologist Daiqin Li of Hubei University in Wuhan, China, and
colleagues set up cameras on spiders’ webs in nearby farmland to watch
what happened to fireflies caught in them. The team placed a firefly directly
into the orb weavers’ spider webs and either left the spider or removed it
from its web. After each trial started, the researchers counted how many
additional fireflies got caught in webs every few minutes.  
The best of Sc ience News - direct to your inbox
Headlines and summaries of the latest Science News articles, delivered to
your email inbox every Thursday .
Email
Your email address
CONTINUE8/19/24, 2:43 PM This spider uses trapped ﬁreﬂies to lure in more prey
https://www.sciencenews.org/article/spider-ﬁreﬂies-lure-venom-web 2/4In the webs of Araneus ventricosus spiders, the fireflies changed their
flashes. But in the webs of other spiders, Li says, they did not. 
Male fireflies were more likely to get caught in webs and change their
flashing pattern when an A. ventricosus orb weaver spider was around
compared with when it was absent. Those spiders were also less likely to
capture more fireflies when Li and his team painted over the insects’ flashing
lanterns with black ink, the team observed.  
Trapped males that had been bitten and wrapped in a spider’s silk also
stopped using both their lanterns (males have two) to pulse light. Flashing
just a single lantern, the males’ signals became weaker, single pulses of light,
appearing much closer to a female flashing pattern. 
The orb weavers also handled fireflies differently than nonflashing beetle
species, Li says. While spiders wrapped other beetles in a thick layer of silk
and began to feed almost immediately, fireflies got a light wrapping so their
lanterns were still visible and then were stocked away in the web.  
As more fireflies get caught, Li says, the spiders “repeat the sequence for
each of them and leave them there, just flashing.” 
The jury is still out on how exactly the signals change, Nelson says. Li
suspects the spider’s bite or venom has something to do with it. He’s now
planning to test those ideas and look for orb weavers outside of southeast
Asia that use this tactic. 
CITATIONS
X. Fu et al. Spider manipulates and exploits firefly’s bioluminescent signals. Current Biology. Published online
August 19, 2024. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2024.07.011.  
We are at a critical time and supporting science journalism is
mor e important than ever. Science News and our parent8/19/24, 2:43 PM This spider uses trapped ﬁreﬂies to lure in more prey
https://www.sciencenews.org/article/spider-ﬁreﬂies-lure-venom-web 3/4organization, the Society for Science, need your help to
strengthen scientific literacy and ensure that important societal
decisions are made with science in mind.
Please subscribe to Science News and add $16 to expand
science literacy and understanding.8/19/24, 2:43 PM This spider uses trapped ﬁreﬂies to lure in more prey
https://www.sciencenews.org/article/spider-ﬁreﬂies-lure-venom-web 4/4